---
author: James Wilson
categories:
  - Leadership
date: "2020-05-05T09:30:54Z"
image: stock/laptop-typing.jpg
title: My Writing Process
excerpt: When I write, I start by defining the single purpose of the document and then I'll write just a few sentences that capture the key points I want to make in the introduction and the three or four supporting paragraphs. These few sentences are encased in square brackets and become the blocked-out structure of the document. Scroll down to see the blocks I used when writing this document. With this framework established, I then write the paragraphs that expand on the blocks one paragraph at a time.
---

When I write, I start by defining the single purpose of the document and then I'll write just a few sentences that capture the key points I want to make in the introduction and the three or four supporting paragraphs. These few sentences are encased in square brackets and become the blocked-out structure of the document. Scroll down to see the blocks I used when writing this document. With this framework established, I then write the paragraphs that expand on the blocks one paragraph at a time. Breaking the document up into a single purpose statement and a few key points that support the single purpose helps you get started. It makes the process more approachable. You're no longer faced with the daunting task of writing a document. You've got your purpose defined, and now just need to fill out a couple of paragraphs for which you've already made a head start on!

Defining a single purpose for your document, the one thing you want the reader to take away from it, is second only in importance to getting started. Without a single purpose to align each paragraph to, and lead your reader toward, the document will meander and confuse. Arriving at that single purpose starts the process of refining your own thinking through writing it down. If your single purpose ends up sounding like two or more things, then try taking a step back and look for the commonality or higher purpose of those items. It's like zooming out the image that is your idea. Zoom out until you can describe it clearly in one sentence. If you're not able to break free from multiple purposes for the document then consider whether this is actually multiple documents that could, and probably should, stand alone.

Blocking out the basic structure of the document helps to create a linear flow from an introduction through to the conclusion you want the reader to arrive at. I find frustrating when I read a document where each paragraph is repeating the same motif but offering a little more detail. Instead, you want to take the reader on a journey by providing an introduction that presents the idea, followed by a few paragraphs that articulate the essence of the idea. I suggest avoiding a conclusion paragraph. You've only got 1 page to work with, and the conclusion should be clear from your introduction and supporting paragraphs.

Starting from the introduction, begin writing the paragraphs one by one under the summary sentences blocks you wrote. After you write a paragraph, read it back and compare it to what you wrote as the summary block for that paragraph. Make sure you've explained the key point you intended for this section, and also that it aligns to, and helps to arrive at, the single purpose for the document. Avoid jumping between sections, and instead write it following the same linear flow that you expect it to be read: from start to finish.

Once you've written the paragraphs, it's time to take out the scaffolding and edit your document down to a single page. This is where the most value is derived from the exercise of writing. Just as you clarified your intent by arriving at a single purpose for the document, the process of editing the paragraphs down to their essence will distill your thinking. The key is to remove every single word that isn't absolutely necessary to convey the point you intended to make in a given paragraph. At Amazon we called these weasel words. Taking out these unnecessary words makes your document more succinct and strengthens your document through clear and deliberate language. The better you can clearly and efficiently articulate your idea, the more you will be able to build the shared vision with others who read the document. This is how an idea begins to get traction toward becoming an outcome.
